Dispelling the Darkness of the Two Obscurations: A Brief and Clear Sādhana of the Bhagavān Vajra Akṣobhya I bow down to the lotus feet Of the lama, Vajra Akṣobhya. This sādhana, for the accomplishment of Vajra Akṣobhya, Is like the moonlight that dispels the darkness of the two obscurations. First take refuge, generate bodhicitta, and meditate on the four immeasurables to accumulate merit. Then, in order to accumulate wisdom, say the following mantra to bring to mind that all phenomena are beyond conceptual elaboration. OṂ ŚUNYATĀ JÑĀNA VAJRA SVABHĀVĀTMA KO 'HAṂ The natural outcome of the two accumulations is deity yoga. Meditate on the deity's features and recite the mantra. From the natural state of emptiness appears the syllable PAṂ, which produces a lotus and the syllable A. The syllable A transforms into a moon-disc seat, upon which sits my own mind in the form of a dark blue HŪṂ. HŪṂ transforms into a five-pronged vajra with HŪṂ marking its hub. It emanates rays of light, making offerings to the noble ones and removing the two obscurations of all beings. The light then returns to the vajra, and I appear as Vajra Akṣobhya, Sapphire-colored, immaculate, and bright, emanating rays of light. My right hand forms the earth-touching mudrā; my left forms the mudrā of equipoise, displaying a vajra. I am peaceful and smiling, graced with all the marks and signs, Adorned with robes of divine silk and jewel ornaments, And sitting cross-legged in the vajra posture. At my three places, a white OṂ, a red ĀḤ, and a blue HŪṂ Grant blessings that transform my three doors into the three vajras. As you say these words, actualize their meaning. Form the mudrā of samaya by pressing the palms of your hands together, crossing your ring fingers, and bending your index fingers while pressing the tips to the back of your middle fingers. Touch your three centers with this mudrā as you say the respective dhāraṇī mantras [OṂ, ĀḤ, HŪṂ] to bless your three doors and transform them into the three vajras. Again, the HŪṂ at my heart emanates rays of light, Extending the vajra invitation to the wisdom deity-VAJRA SAMĀJAḤ! OM ARGHAṂ . . . SVĀHĀ With JAḤ HŪṂ BAṂ HOḤ, the wisdom deity melts into light and dissolves into me. On the lotus and maṇḍala of the moon in the center of my heart, The syllables HŪṂ OṂ TRĀṂ HRĪḤ ĀḤ appear and transform into the supreme heads of the five families. Blazing with the glory of the marks and signs, adorned with silk garments and jewel ornaments, They emanate many-colored rays of light. Make the offerings with: OṂ SARVA TATHĀGATA VAJRA AKṢOBHYA MAṆḌALA SAPARIVĀRA ARGHAṂ [PĀDYAṂ PUṢPE DHŪPE ĀLOKE GANDHE NAIVEDYE ŚABDA PRATĪCCHA SVĀHĀ] With devotion I prostrate, make offerings, And pray to the bhagavān victors and their heirs- Bestow your blessings! Cleanse and purify the negativity and obscurations of myself and others, and grant us the supreme and ordinary accomplishments! In the heart of the main deity, who sits in my heart on a moon disc, The white garland of the dhāraṇī mantra emanates rays of brilliant light, Making offerings to the noble ones and eliminating the negativity and obscurations of all beings. The light rays then reconverge at my heart and blaze intensely with the splendor of their blessings. Maintain this visualization and recite as many dhāraṇī mantras as possible. At the end of the session, practice nonconceptual yoga. Relatively I perceive myself as the body of the deity, A magical display that appears yet does not exist. Ultimately beyond characteristics Is the primordial wisdom free from elaboration. Say this stanza and apply your powers of reason to analyze its meaning. Rest in what you find. When you arise, say: The wisdom deities at the center of my heart Appear before me in the sky. I offer them clouds of offerings as vast as the ocean, Which I manifest through samādhi. Supplicate with the offering and praises as above. Recite the hundred-syllable mantra three times. Then say: I confess whatever mistakes I have made. O wisdom deities, depart for the dharmadhātu. As the samayasattva, my three places Are marked with the three seed syllables. Say the following prayer and other prayers of dedication and aspiration to end the session before engaging in the activities of "in-between" sessions: Through the positivity and merit of this . . .  If you do a retreat, divide the day into three sessions and recite the long dhāraṇī 400,000 or 100,000 times. At the end of the second session, also offer the torma in three parts. May the light of the conceptual and nonconceptual yogas Of Bhagavān Vajra Akṣobhya Dispel the darkness of obscurations And may we all attain omniscience together! Following the excellent elucidation by the accomplished master Jetāri, this brief and clear practice was compiled in a condensed manner by the Śākya monk Mañjughoṣa. 
